Hi, I'm Hadley Wickham, the Chief Scientist at Posit, and for the purpose of this video,
the Chief Maintainer of the purr package. So what is the purr package? It's kind of hard to
describe what purr is to be honest, but to put it into words, I think I've got a pretty good sense
of like what function feels like a purr function to me. But I think the best way to think of it is
as a toolkit for help, for supporting like functional programming. What is functional
programming? That's also kind of hard to explain, but the chief advantage is it gives you a bunch
of tools for operating on vectors, or pairs of vectors, or triplets, or etc. of vectors,
where you work on each individual element of the vector in isolation. And that allows you to
apply a function to do something to each element, knowing that there's no way that the other other
elements are going to affect the computation at all. So many of the functions of purr are
alternatives to for loops. For loops are by any means like not a bad thing. You should never be
embarrassed or ashamed of using a for loop. For loops are great because they're like very,
very concrete. It's like very obvious what you're doing, because you're doing like,
take this element and do this to it. Take that element and do that. And you can very easily
think about like stepping through that. So the functions in purr, particularly the map functions,
are kind of a step up in abstraction. And that step up is, it's a challenge, right? But I think
there's some good reasons to do it. And the first one is it makes it easy to avoid, or ensures that
you avoid some like performance bottlenecks with loops. Now for loops themselves are not slow,
but if in your for loop it's easy to get to accidentally repeatedly modify or repeatedly
extend a vector, then that can be slow. Although changes in the latest versions of argument are
much less bad than it has been in the past. So performance, a little bit useful. I think one
big advantage of switching to purr is that you can also switch to, it's not future,
but the fur package. So the fur package is, has exactly the same syntax as purr,
but it spreads the computation across multiple ports. So purr, because it guarantees that all
of the computations are independent, much much easier to share that work across multiple ports.
The other thing, particularly in this latest version of purr, is that it gives you a really,
a access to a really powerful useful tool, and that's progress paths, which I'll talk about a
little bit later. But purr, definitely kind of an advanced programming tool. You can go a very
long way with for loops, but I think if you can master the map functions of purr, you can write
code that is more succinct, more clear, and more likely to be correct the first time you write it.
So today I'm going to talk about purr 1.0, and the 1.0 release of any package is pretty special,
because it's kind of, this marks the package as at least like the initial development is kind of
done. This is a package that we are confident about, it's stable, and we expect it to be around
for the long term. And for purr in particular, this is kind of an opportunity to take a look
at it broadly, and say which of the functions in this package are really related to the core
purpose of functional programming, of working with vectors and functions,
and which functions of purr are not, and maybe need to be superseded or duplicated.
So why don't we start with some of my favorite features of the purr 1.0. And I think the
most exciting feature, the coolest feature, is the new progress bar. So let's just make a little,
very silly little example. Let's take a brief look at what life is like without progress bar.
So let's just imagine we're going to map over 100 numbers, and in lieu of doing anything
useful here, I'm just gonna, I'm just gonna sleep, I'm just gonna pause for a 10th of a second.
So when I run this code, like I know something's working, I know this is going to take 10 seconds
in total, but I'm getting like no feedback on what's going on. And for a real life job,
you don't know exactly how long it's going to take, and you don't know when something's happening,
like should you just take a deep breath, should you go grab a coffee, or should you come back
tomorrow. So what's great now, in the latest version of purr, is you can say dot progress
equals true, and get a convenient progress bar that tells you both how far through the process
you are, and an estimated time till completion, assuming that every single iteration takes about
the same amount of time. Now that alone, I think, is pretty great for interactive usage.
If you are putting these inside of a function, you can add here, instead of just a true, you can add
a string, which will be used as a label for the progress bar, so you know exactly what's going on.
Okay, so my next, next really useful feature, instead of a part of a big push across the
tidyverse, is better error messages. So again, I'm just going to make up some some dumb kind of
sample data I've just taken, the numbers between 1 and 500, and randomly reorganize them,
and I'm going to make a little function, and this function is, most of the time,
it's just going to double that number, but every now and then, that's going to have an error.
Again, I'm just kind of simulating what might happen in your real code.
Not particularly useful by itself, but now if I run this code,
what's really handy is, Matt is going to tell you exactly where that error occurred.
So I can look at the 318th argument, and I know that's 1, 2, 3, which, by inspection of this
function, is pretty easy to determine, but in real life, this is really helpful at, like, figuring out
exactly where that problem occurred. Now, of course, you can still use all of the, you know, useful functions
and occur, like, safely, and possibly for, if you expect errors and want to capture them some way,
but this new ability to tell you where the error occurred is hopefully something that's helpful, and
just, just makes your life a little bit easier every day. We've also generally just, like, reviewed the
error messages elsewhere. Again, it's part of this kind of big tidyverse effort to make sure
you get error messages. Maybe I can, is it somewhere I can show that to you here? So maybe if I try and
supply an environment or something weird instead of a function,
now we have this pretty standard kind of error framing where we try and tell you, like, what went
wrong? It was an environment. Well, what did we want? A function. And you'll see this more and more
as we work on improving error messages across the tidyverse. We also have a new map function
called mapvec. So if you're an existing Perl user, you probably know about maplg alpha that
produces a logical vector, mapint for integer vectors, mapdouble for double vectors, map
for character vectors. You might wonder, like, what about all the other things? Like, is there
going to be a map date? Is there going to be, like, a map factor? Is there going to be some kind of map
thing for every single possible type of object in R? This is something we've been struggling with
for a while in Perl. We can never quite figure out what to do. But there's now a new function
called mapvec that's going to work with any type of vector object. So anything like a factor or
a date or a date time is now going to work. So, for example, I could map over the numbers 1 to 3
in my function. I'm just going to add those to today's date. That's going to give me another date
and that's going to give me a vector of dates. Or I could take some letters,
first three letters,
and then when I use mapvec, it's going to give me a factor, just as you'd expect.
So it uses the rules from the vectors package. Vectors is a package that hopefully you as a
data scientist don't need to care about, but it's something that we're using more and more in the
kind of the depths of the tidyverse to make sure all of the rules that we use are consistent. So
you don't have to memorize these rules, but hopefully as you use functions around the
tidyverse, you kind of just, you just naturally over time learn what those rules are. You know,
you might not be able to make them explicit, but because everything is consistent and behaves in
the same way, you build up this internal knowledge of the theory that underlies these functions.
One thing I should note about mapvec is it's kind of one of its invariants,
one of its things that are always true, is that the length of the input is the same as the length
of the output. So if you try and create a new vector, maybe I'm going to try and
just double every element, that's not going to work. And again, I'm going to get this error
message telling me what is supposed to happen. Every element has to be size one. In this case,
I've got an element of size two. So what happens if you do want to
do something like this? Well, you can do this with map. That's going to give you a list with
each of those components. And new in this version of CUR are a set of functions called listc,
listrbind and listcbind, which lets you take the output, the functions like this,
and, for example, combine them all into a vector. Again, this is using vectors under the hood,
so this is going to give you exactly the same, it's going to use exactly the same coercion rules
that mapvec uses, but in this case, you can use it to produce something where every element
does it differently. So, for example, we could take the element and repeat it the number of
times. So we get one, one, two, twos, and three threes. If we just map that, we can see a list
with those elements. And then if we use listc, that's going to concatenate them all into a
single vector. So listrbind and listcbind work similarly, except for data frames. These kind
of replace these sort of supersede mapdfc and mapdfr and mapdfc. These functions are super
useful, and we know lots of people use them, but they're not really map functions because of this
idea of this invariant, that the input should be the same length as the output for a map function.
That is pretty important for the meaning of this map. And so we've decided these functions
aren't really that great, so we've superseded them. So if you're not familiar with what that
means, that means they are not going away, they're not deprecated, they're not on a path to being
removed, but we don't recommend them anymore. So in some sense, these functions are the safest
functions to use because we're going to just put them away and we're never going to touch them,
but we just don't recommend using them. So instead, we recommend combining a map with one
of these list concatenation functions, whether it's listcbind, listrbind, or listc. So another
area of PUR that's got quite a lot of love in this race is this general idea of flattening
and simplification. So this is about what happens if you've got some complicated nested list
and you want to simplify things. And things have changed. Since we wrote this stuff in PUR,
quite a lot of things have changed. In particular, for example, tidyr now has some really nice tools
like unnest longer and unnest wider, so that if you are working with a very hierarchical data set,
you've got something called a JSON API and you want to turn it into a data frame,
these tidyr functions are really the place to start now.
Previously, you had to use these quite low-level PUR functions. You can still keep using those,
but generally unnest longer and unnest wider can allow you to express what you want a little bit
more simply and a little more clearly. But that means that this gave us an opportunity to look
at these functions in PUR and think now, you're not being forced to use them for these data
data analysis operations. Now we can think about what are the right primitives here.
These are things you're probably not going to use as much day-to-day. They're more useful when you're
programming. They might be tools that we're going to use elsewhere in the tidyverse for solving
problems. But we wanted to take a look holistically and think what's going on.
And certainly, we caused a lot of confusion in our team. We couldn't remember what does
flatten do, what does simplify do. We've had some internal functions and other packages which do
other things and just ended up causing a lot of confusion. We didn't have a shared language
that we could use when talking to one another. So we tried to unify things, simplify things
in this version. And just to give you one example, let's talk about the flatten function.
So here I have a list. The first element of the list is just a number. The second element of a
list is itself another list. And the second element of that list is another list. So we have this kind
of complicated tree-like structure. Now what we can do is use list flatten to remove one layer
of that hierarchy. So let's just call it, I'm going to use str again just to illustrate the
structure a little bit more easily, and then see what happens. Let's just give a little bit more
room in the console so we can kind of compare them. So previously we had a list of two things,
now we've got a list of four things. You can kind of see what's happened, right? This list,
this sub-list of three items, has kind of been like pulled up to the top level.
So that list itself had another list in it, so we could call a list flatten again to flatten that.
And now we have like a, what we'd call like a perfectly flapped list. A list that doesn't
contain any other lists. And if we call list flatten on that again, nothing's going to happen,
we're still going to get a list. So list flatten is always going to return a list.
You don't know how long that list is going to be, it's going to be kind of a sum. It's normally
going to increase in size because you're going to have sub-lists of varying number of children,
they're going to get kind of hoisted up into the parent. But you've made this list as flat as
possible. Now if you want to make this simpler, you can't make this list any flatter, but we could
use like a simpler data structure, right? For example, so we could, if we call to the simplify
now, we're going to go to a simpler data structure, which in this case is a numeric vector.
So let's just illustrate the difference between flattening and simplification with a
list that has like a variety of types in it.
So the same structure as before, but now we've got a logical in there and a character vector.
Okay, let's flatten it.
Look at the results. So we've still got a list. We'll flatten it again.
We still have a list. Now, can we make this any simpler?
Well, what happened if we call this simplify? Well, no, we can't make this any simpler because
we're trying to combine a double and a character, a number and a string together, and there's
nothing simpler than a list that will allow you to have both of these in a single data structure.
So this is as simple as we get. In this kind of idea, like now we've got this clear distinction
between flattening, which is decreasing always. When you flatten a list, you still get a list,
but the number of items might have changed. And simplification, we're going to always get
something that's an atomic vector or a factor or a date, but you're always going to have the
same number of items in there. I think it has this nice kind of symmetry. Either you're changing
the size by keeping the type the same, or you're changing the type and keeping the size the same,
and that is a nice kind of split that hopefully allows you to solve problems without getting
confused between what different functions you use. So to finish up, I wanted to cover what's
possibly like the biggest set of changes to Per in this release, which is basically saying these
are all the things that Per no longer does, that we don't believe that these are actually related
to the core purpose of Per. And I think this is a really important part of the life cycle of
packages, that as we understand what the core purpose of the package is better, we can remove
things. And that comes at a cost. If you're an existing user, you might love some of these
functions. That refinement hurts existing users, but we do it for the future users, because when
people in the future come to Per, they're going to see a more tighter, more cohesive set of functions
that are easier to understand. So most of these we have like superseded. There are some things that
we've deprecated, because we think they're really pretty uncommon to use them, or there's major
problems with them. So again, most of these will continue to work. Superseded functions will stay
around for a long time. Deprecated functions are definitely on the path out, but we're trying to do
that as gradually as possible. So if you use a deprecated function in the kind of first release
it's deprecated, it'll warn you like every eight hours that that function's going away. We're trying
to walk this line between like being annoying enough that you eventually get rid of the
deprecated function in favor of the new solution, but not so annoying that it's as bad as just taking
the function away. So deprecated functions in this release, they will warn every eight hours.
In the next bigger release, which will be in one or two years, they'll warn every single
time you use them, and then some release after that, probably two or three years after that,
they will error when you use them. So a deprecated function, you've still got like a couple of years
to fix it, but you really do need to work on that at some point, because those functions are not
So let's do a quick overview of those functions. I'm just looking at the news file,
which tracks every single change you've made to the package. If you're like a really big
user of a package, I think it's a really good idea to familiarize yourself with these files,
because you, in the blog post, we try and just hit the biggest point, the things that we think are
most important, but useful for you to scan the news functions, because things that might be
important for you, might not be important for lots of other people, or we might just be wrong.
Also great, like if you've got, you know, if you've got your own blog and want to find something to
write about, like read through the news of packages and look at stuff that we haven't advertised,
because I can guarantee you there are useful blog posts to be written about things that
we've changed, that we're not gonna, we're not gonna be writing about, and that's a great way
to kind of dig into the development of a package and help educate others as well. So kind of quick
summary, cross I think was a pretty old function. I don't think many of you were using it, but it's,
you're much better off using tidy as expand grid function. We had a bunch of functions that kind
of used non-standard evaluation in some way. There were the, it was these just three functions in
purr that used non-standard evaluation or tidy evaluation in some way, which just felt
like not a good fit, so we've got rid of those. So no function in purr uses,
no non-deprecated function in purr uses tidy select anymore. We had the lift family of functions,
which I think are a kind of a really cool idea. They're sort of a little bit mind-blowing about
what you can do with functions and functional programming, but I just, it's just an unusual
style of programming and we think that most people are better off not knowing about it.
Then we have a bunch of functions that I'm like, I have no idea why we ever included these in purr,
especially these like random number generators ones. I'm not sure why they ever ended up in
purr, but they're now on the way out. And splice, which is a much older tool that allows you to kind
of cram together like lists of lists. We used to use it as kind of an alternative for some of the
stuff that we've replaced with dynamic dots or tidy select. That just doesn't make any sense.
Other stuff in maps or things you could do with map functions,
that again, I don't know why we ever implemented these because they're not really vectors,
so they don't work anymore. We got rid of the raw variants. I don't think anyone ever actually
used them. We've made some changes to how things like map character works. Previously,
you could just do something like this.
And that would give you a character vector. Now it's going to warn, and the reason we warn is
because the way it does the coercion is like pretty, pretty weird, and I think there's...
It's pretty weird, and if so, if you're creating like really small numbers,
it just like silently truncates them, which is clearly pretty bad, so we got rid of that.
Whatever, there are a bunch of other deprecated functions of previous releases. They're kind of
like marching along the process to going away altogether, so a couple of functions. So here's
two functions that have gone away now that we deprecated five years ago. Now we can finally get
rid of them. Yeah, I think those are the main ones. So it's really like I think part of the
really important part of the process of package life cycle and package development is not just
adding new functions, but it is equally important to remove those functions, and we know that
removing functions that used to work is frustrating, and so we have developed this process,
this life cycle process of deprecation, where it starts with pretty mild warnings and kind of gets
progressively aggressive, more and more aggressive over time. We hope this is useful. We hope that
this kind of gradually pushes you towards the golden path without like forcing you
rudely when you're working on something else to urgently switch something, but at the same time
we believe that we want these functions to be better. We want these things to have a more
consistent cohesive syntax because that makes it easier for future users, and I think we're doing
pretty well. We've certainly got a lot better, I think, at handling deprecations and breakages,
but we're certainly, you know, still trying, still learning, and if you have any feedback,
please hit us. If you're interested in learning more about functional programming in general,
I think a really good place to start is Advanced R, which has three chapters on functional
programming. Functionals, Function Factories, and Function Operators, and there's a lot of text here,
but you don't have to necessarily read the text because I think it's got some really good
pictures as well, and this is kind of the basic idea of a map function. You take a map, the first
argument is a vector, and you've got a function, and what that gives you as a vector in the result
where you've called f on each element of the vector in turn, and once you've kind of got that idea,
then we can kind of scroll down, and what happens if you have like a list of elements, or
go down a little bit further, what happens if you supply additional arguments, or what happens,
let's go quite a few, what happens if you have multiple vectors that you want to kind of iterate
through, iterate on parallel, like so this, once you, I think these these pictures give you a
really quick overview, like what does map2 do? Well map2 has two vectors, and it calls f on the
first element of the first one, and the first on the second one, then the second element of the
first one, and so on, and then once you've kind of internalized what map2 does, you might wonder,
well what happens if we've got three vectors, or I don't care about the output, and I think this
kind of, if you just skim through these pictures, when we can get into the reduced family and other
more complicated things, this can give you a kind of great sense of the basic idea of these functions.
So in this video I've given you the top highlight, my top highlights, of per 1.0. If you want to
learn more, like read the blog post, if you want more details than that, I'd recommend reading
the news, as I mentioned, the news file, as I mentioned earlier. If you are using a deprecated
function, or a superseded function, and want to learn what you should do now, I forgot to mention
this earlier, but if you go to the documentation for that function, and scroll down to the examples,
you'll see that there's a bunch of examples that kind of show you like what did you do previously,
and what you should do now. So hopefully that will guide you in updating your code too. If you've got
other problems, if we have broken something that's really important to you, a great place to do is,
a great place to go is the github page for purr. Love your issues, love questions. If you do have a
problem with your code, really really useful for us if you create a refrex or a reproducible example.
Of course we have a package to help you do that, so you might want to learn a little bit about
using refrexes. This just gives us some like runnable code that we can immediately run. There's
no like trying to figure out exactly what you did. We can take your code, see what you did,
run it ourselves, and that just makes answering a question that much easier. If you have something
that doesn't rise quite to the level of like a bug or a github issue, another great place to
reach me is on mastodon. Very happy to answer kind of any general questions there. I'll point you in
the right direction to places to look up. So I hope you've enjoyed learning more about purr,
and thanks for watching this video.